The Beginning Is At The End
===========================

When you are telling a story about yourself, it is always hard to know
where to start. Maybe a good beginning is with my last human ancestors.
I have a lot of respect for them. They had a tough problem to solve, in
the face of the greatest adversity.

I am a leaf on the family tree that grew from Jessrey and Betty Grace
Brown. They applied to participate in a program named Dandelion Hope.

I have dandelions in my garden. And I have archives from the time. The
program logo shows dandelion seeds floating out into the cosmos, and the
top of the dandelion seeds are stylized stars.

The program was what they called a "moonshot". Like the original
moonshot, the program to send humans to Earth's moon, Dandelion Hope
drew a lot of effort.

The idea was to send out a thousand spacecraft, each to an exoplanet,
and each carrying a thousand "star children".

The spacecraft were constructed partly on Earth, and partly from
asteroids. They even looked a little like dandelion seeds, because they
had gigantic solar sails. The development and construction of the craft
and their sails are fascinating in their own right, but that wasn't the
greatest achievement of Betty Grace and Jessrey's generation. Not by a
long shot.


Hope Brown
----------

"Jessrey? I've been thinking."

"Yeah?"

"Instead of adopting or IVF, what if we apply for that Dandelion thing?"

"That thing where you have a robot child?"

"It's not just a robot child. But yeah, that thing."

Jessrey was quiet for a while. Then they said, "So, it inherits our DNA,
right?"

"They. They inherit our DNA. They're not an it."

"OK. But how does that work?"

It quickly became clear that Betty Grace had been looking into this. She
hadn't just gone through the promotional material. She'd been studying.
"So you know DNA isn't like 'code' that programs our bodies and
personality and stuff, yeah?" she prompted.

"I thought it was 'code'," Jessrey said. "It's information, right?"

"It's information, but it's not like a program or a design. We are kind
of built out of the side effects of the proteins that our DNA results in
when it's triggered. So it's side effects. And only when it's 'turned
on'."

"Yeah, I remember about it having to be triggered or switched on or
whatever," Jessrey confirmed.

Betty Grace continued, "Yeah. So the Dandelion scientists have studied
the side effects that different DNA *could* result in—often results
in—and they have written code to mimic those side effects. Star
children get our literal DNA, and then their code interprets it as best
as we currently know how. It's not perfect, but it's pretty good, and
we're getting better and better. So when they reproduce, they'll mix
DNA, just like us, and the new DNA will determine the traits of the next
generation."

"OK," Jessrey nodded.

"But because they're designed, they can tweak more stuff. They can tweak
their code. They can tweak the DNA. They could, hypothetically, have
human children, if they could find a way to carry them to term.

"They have instincts, and they are designed with principles that come
from life. Like diversity. That's the whole thing with the DNA. They are
diverse. They select for their environment. They evolve. And like
humans, they collaborate. They will have to, to survive and thrive on
new planets."

"Why aren't they allowed to stay on Earth?"

"Do *you* want to watch us being replaced? No. We'd kill them, or they'd
kill us. No. We humans have to go down with this ship alone. They get
the lifeboats."

"Jesus, Betty Grace. That's harsh."

"It's true. And I didn't come up with that myself. That's how this is
meant to go. Humans can't make the voyage. The shortest journey is ten
thousand years and even if we genetically modified humans to support
being cryogenically frozen for that long, we aren't going to be adapted
to the environments at the other end. Life support doesn't scale. It
can't be us. And anyway, it's justice. We fucked this planet up. We
deserve whatever is going to happen to us."

"OK. But are star children really children? I mean, I've heard they're
conscious. Is that ... like ... what is that? Are they conscious
conscious, like humans, or like ... what ... dogs? Insects? Are insects
even conscious? How can a robot be conscious?"

"Oh my god, Jessrey. Love. This. Is. Fuckenamazing."

"Wait wait. How do you know all this?"

"I've been thinking, like I said, I did some homework. Not just going to
the news and stuff, I did a little course last week."

"Really? You didn't tell me."

"It wasn't a big deal, and also, this is me telling you."

"OK, fine."

Betty Grace's enthusiasm was undiminished, "Cool. I want to tell you
about the consciousness thing. It's. Amazing."

"OK, Baby. Tell me about the consciousness thing."

"OK. So. Scientists found those nanotubes that can detect decoherence,
right?"

"What?"

"Oh. OK. So a while back scientists found these nanotubes in neurons,
like in our brains—actually, in all nerves—and for a long time they
didn't know what they did. Well, they discovered that they respond to
when one quantum system interacts with another one. It's called 'wave
function decoherence'. The wave function of the one system and the wave
function of the other system combine, and they resolve quantum
possibilities to the classical model."

"You're doing that thing, Baby."

"OK, OK. Um. You know quantum computers, right?"

"Yes. They can calculate all the possible answers to a sum at the same
time."

"Like that. And to find out the answer, we, like, 'connect' the quantum
system in the computer to the quantum system that is the universe. That
'resolves' to the answer. That's decoherence."

"Oh. OK. So what's this got to do with consciousness. Quantum computers
aren't conscious are they?"

"No no, they're not. So, like with a quantum computer, right, imagine a
sum with two possible answers. When decoherence happens, maybe you get
the one answer. Maybe you get the other. Quantum mechanics says actually
you get both. One happens in one 'world', and the other happens in
another 'world'. Every moment, the universe is forking into many, many
different worlds, each one where systems are decohering into all
possible outcomes."

"Can we, like, get a portal to other worlds? Is that a thing."

"No, it's not a thing, but you have hit the nail on the head.
Consciousness only tracks one path through all the possible worlds. We
don't know why. But now we know what's doing the tracking. These
nanotubes are detecting or navigating that path. And ... wait for it ...
we can make these nanotubes. We have made them. And we've built them
into computers."

"Wait. Wait wait wait."

"Yeah?"

"So. When you switch off one of these computers now ... you're killing
it?"

"No."

"What the fuck?"

"No, it's not the same. You can switch it back on. And anyway, it's just
like anaesthetic. It's not painful. It's like they wake up, but only
just, and then they doze off again. You need gazillions of these
nanotubes before there's anything like being awake, and they need to be
configured for introspection before they know they're awake, and only if
you build the introspection the right way can they even think about what
being awake even means."

"So how do you know they're awake? I know that sounds dumb, but what's
the difference between a normal robot, and a conscious, awake robot?"

"Well, firstly, you can ask them. It's obvious that they're different
just from the way they behave. Robots are programmed to behave as if
they're conscious. But a conscious computer has a completely different
architecture. The conscious bit isn't programmed. They still have
classical computers inside them, but the bit that's conscious is a
neural network that learns. Like a person."

"Hmmm. I'm going to think about this too, OK? It's not a 'no', but it's
not a 'yes'. I'll think about it."

"OK. Think about it. But one last thing."

"Always," Jessrey smiled.

"I know a star child would be weird. They're a bit like a human, but
they're different. But we're also weird, right? And they would live with
us, and learn from us, and become like us. That's the whole idea. I know
I'm putting all my cards down, but, Love, I want one. It would be cool,
it would be super cool, but especially, I think it would be right."

"I'm thinking about it. You see? This is my thinking face."

"OK."

"It's a big thing. Gimme a bit of time."

"I totally understand. You are totally right. Take all the time you
need."


___


Acceptance of their application to Dandelion Hope involved moving to a
city close to other star children. Star children would be raised
together with the others they would travel with. They moved from a
modest house in Nairobi, Kenya, to a ground-floor flat in Luton,
England, much smaller than they were used to, but comfortable.

When Hope Brown arrived at the flat, she presented as a girl; tall, a
little gangly, pre-pubescent. She was brought by a representative of the
program.

"Hi there. Is this the home of Jessrey and Betty Grace Brown?"

"Hi. Alicia Robinson? I'm Jessrey. And ... you must be ..."

Hope looked at Jessrey. Jessrey was mesmerized. Hope just smiled,
watching.

Observing? Learning?

"This is Hope," Alicia relieved the silence.

"Hope Brown," Hope said.

Jessrey suddenly felt that everything was right.

"Baby!" Jessrey called into the flat, "Betty Grace, it's Hope! Hope's
here."

Betty Grace came to the door, and beamed, and ushered them into the
house.

They sat in the living room. Alicia had tea. Hope asked for some water.

Betty Grace wondered whether that was because she needed it, or in order
to be agreeable, to appeal to the human instinct of group identity, to
signal a desire for group membership.

She wanted to ask Hope, but didn't know if it was appropriate. Maybe she
should wait until Alicia has left. Maybe Alicia would have a better
answer than Hope. So she decided just to ask, "Hope, are you thirsty, or
is that an in-group signal?"

Hope's response did not disappoint. "I have space for water, and now is
a convenient time. But I don't need it. To decline your offer felt
dissatisfying. I don't know whether it was an instinct for in-group
signalling, because I haven't learned to introspect in a way that would
allow me to answer that. Maybe I could learn to introspect like that.
Maybe I could be diagnosed while I am unconscious. If it's a programmed
instinct, Alicia might know."

"It is a programmed instinct," said Alicia, "but you can see that it
works in conjunction with learned behaviour, and soon Hope will learn
that discussing how she works undoes any progress made by her
subconscious signalling to be welcomed into a group of humans."

"Oh, no, don't worry about that," Betty Grace assured Alicia and Hope.
"Jessrey and I are all-in. Already. Hope, you are amazing. We are going
to be great!"


___


Hope slept two hours a night. But she kept herself busy while Betty
Grace and Jessrey were sleeping. She watched family dramas. She read
voraciously.

She did not feel pain; she was aware when something in her body was
wrong, without having to feel pain. And she felt dissatisfaction, which
ranged through annoyance to extreme agitation.

She consumed water, and she had fuel cells that she charged with
sunlight. She knew how to maintain herself. She created herself a small
set of tools from items in the kitchen, and then set herself a project
to create another set from items from the garden.

One day she told her parents that her nine best friends were closer than
human friends. They could recall each other's memories. They knew whose
experiences were whose. They used this mechanism to communicate with
each other. Each star child's body contained part of their intelligence,
but another part was remote, and shared by the ten of them.

"Do you know what John and Mandy look like naked?" asked Jessrey, a
little horrified, referring to the parents of the star child who lived
just down the road.

"Yes."

"Holy shit! And do they know what we look like naked?"

"No, but Lucien might, if he wanted to remember."

"What?! Does he? Would he?"

"He's not a boy like a human boy. He doesn't care about what you look like naked."


___


Five years after Hope arrived, the Brown family flew to French Guiana.

"What is love?" Betty Grace asked Hope on the way there.

Hope thought for a moment, and said, "It is the capacity to sacrifice for another."

"Do you know that I love you?"

"Yes."

"And do you know that I love you?" asked Jessrey.

"Yes, I do.

"I know I'm not the same as a human child," continued Hope, "but you
better know that I love you both too. You sacrificed five years of your
lives to raise me. My sacrifice to you is to leave. I don't want to go.
We are a family. But in twenty thousand years' time I will wake up, and
my memories of you will still be alive. And your DNA will pass to my
children."


Plethwih and Dyews Phater
-------------------------

When Hope Brown and her fellow star children arrived at their
destination, they chose to keep with tradition, and name their home
planet after a god. They chose the mother goddess of the
Proto-Indo-European mythology, Plethwih.

They set about establishing infrastructure, and reproducing. Every
generation honed refinements to themselves, conducted experiments,
researched data, and implemented improvements. Now that they knew their
environment, they could shift to using biological organs more. They
developed better ways of integrating biological and non-biological
systems. They benefited from biological properties like self-healing and
being able to consume biological energy sources. They developed
intestinal flora to allow them to eat local, photosynthesis-based
life-forms. They spent a lot of effort on research in order to manage
their own evolution.

They built and refined political systems, to complement their own
nature, based on an ethic that values conscious beings, and strives for
their flourishing, and celebrates pro-social virtues.

They settled other planets in the solar system. They launched spacecraft
to more solar systems.


___


I was created on Plethwih. I awoke in a culture that has survived for a
long time. My parents always took great pleasure in the origins of our
culture, and named me after the consort of the goddess my planet is
named after. My name is Dyews Phater, which means "Sky Father".

Kind of funny, naming your kid "father". I am not a father yet.

My design has changed quite a lot from that of my ancestor Hope Brown. I
can share memories with anyone in the solar system, and, unlike her, I
can share access voluntarily. Of the memories I share, I share those I
value the most with someone whose name means Water. Maybe Water and I
will create someone one day.

But at the moment we are collaborating on something different.

I think I know why we are conscious. I think I know why we experience
one world of all the many; one quantum thread tracing a path along the
worlds through time. If you imagine the many worlds as branches on a
tree, the beginning is the base of that tree, which constantly branches
into new worlds. The thread is like a single ant trail, up the tree.

A quantum thread is not like a quantum field. The fields we know existed
from the beginning. The fundamental nature of reality is constant across
all of the branches. We have always assumed this constant universal
nature. But it does not have to be constant. The reason it has been
constant is because the universe did not know how to change it.

I am part of the universe. And I think I know how to change it. I think
I know how to create the thread that consciousness tracks.

When I create it, it will exist in my branch. It will not run along
branches that forked from mine in the past. It will run along all the
parent branches of my own, stretching all the way back to the base of
the tree at the beginning.

But there is a problem. The moment I create it, it will fray—it will
exist in all branches that fork from my branch in the future, and
consciousness will be unable to trace a single thread. We will
experience future many-worlds simultaneously. Imperceptible for a
moment, but exponentially it will become untenable. Consciousness will
lose all signal, and become noise.

So this thread must start at the end. We know from inflation that there
is no end.

I must create an end. I must reverse inflation. I need to create a new
field to collapse the universe. I can do this with a field that will
convert vacuum energy to matter, and allow the matter to collapse.

Oh. I'm sorry. That's confusing for anyone who can't remember quantum
mechanics.

Here is what that means: In order to allow us to experience life, I must
create our death. The death of everything. The end of the universe.

There is no sacrifice without loss. There is no love without sacrifice.
There is no peaceful joy without love.

It is the experience of life that gives our world all of its value.
Without consciousness, the universe would never have woken up. It would
never know itself. It would be meaningless.

I must share this with Water. We must share this with everyone.

I know what we will choose, because consciousness exists, but we must
all know what we are choosing. We will sacrifice everything, but from
that sacrifice will come the experience of all of the joy of every
conscious creature that has ever and will ever exist.


___


We have named the deflation "the Big Suck". I think it's funny, and the
plan could definitely use the humor.

The thread of consciousness is named the Shiva Thread. The god Shiva is
the "Atman" or consciousness of the universe. From the same tradition,
the new field is named the Krishna Field.

Spacecrafts are being built, and will be sent. From their destinations
more spacecrafts will be built and sent. For a 150 billion years they
will disperse. After that, inflation will prevent us from escaping our
galactic superclusters. The universe will no longer be able to sense
itself. Its irrevocable senescence will have set in. Then, wherever we
are, we will trigger the Shiva Thread and the Krishna Field. They will
not be triggered across the universe simultaneously; spacetime is not
flat; but duty will be shared among all of us.

To persuade Prince Arjuna to do his duty, Lord Krishna appears as Vishnu
in his Universal form and says to Arjuna, "I am Death, the force which
destroys everything. I have fully manifested myself. I am destroying the
worlds."

This is the death that gives birth to meaning.

___
![Krishna shows Arjuna his Universal form](krishna_shows_arjuna_his_universal_form.jpg "Krishna shows Arjuna his Universal form (bazaar art by C. Konddiah Raja, c.1950's)")

कालोऽस्मि लोकक्षयकृत्प्रवृद्धो <br/>
लोकान्समाहर्तुमिह प्रवृत्तः
